Solana Core Community Call 6 Note 19th May 2023 (#24)
solana-foundation/core-community-call: call-notes/call_6.md

So, there are a lot of problems with this current restart process. Maybe the biggest problem is it takes a long time. So the whole cluster restart takes about, it could take about like several hours. Which would make your reliability not very good. And so, in the future, we might have other efforts to make it faster, but today we are just trying to solve a small problem. And so we are trying to improve the process of finding the highest optimistically confirmed block because it is really hard for human to pull like two thousand to three thousand validators and see what each one voted for, and then decide what the block is. This is really a job better for machine. So, we are trying to see whether we can develop a protocol, so that the machines can automatically find the highest confirmed block without human intervention.

> So, the main design goal here is not to have `false negatives` that means `if a block was confirmed before the restart` that is why not roll it back because that will have very bad impact. And, but `false positives` might be okay. It means maybe some block is not confirmed before the restart but somehow we think it is confirmed which is fine. Let's say there's our limit is at `67`. Let's say there is a block which got `66%` of the votes and there are no competing blocks. So this is the only one we know which got 66 percent of the votes. So it is okay if we the 80% of the validators in restart decide that we should start from here even though it is not confirmed. It is okay to confirm more, but it's not okay to roll back confirmed block. So, in all the choices we have after this, we will see that we try to not have `false negatives` at all. And `false positives`? that might be fine in the design choices. So, the new approach we think because we now want to have machines automatically negotiate what is the block we want to restart that from. So we would still have humans in the room, they would still start restart validators with the argument. Let's say optimists restart, but they don't need to tell you which slot and which hash they need to start from. That's for machines to decide and we would add additional phase, the silent repair phase here is where the validators negotiate with themselves what is a block they should restart from. So, because they are in this repair phase, no one would make new blocks anymore. So there would be no [turbine](https://docs.solana.com/cluster/turbine-block-propagation) traffic at all. The goal here is to just converge as soon as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, the main design goal here is not to have false negatives. That means if a block was confirmed before the restart that is why not roll it back because that will have very bad impact. And, but false positives might be okay. It means maybe some block is not confirmed before the restart but somehow we think it is confirmed which is fine. Let's say there's our limit is at 67. Let's say there is a block which got 66% of the votes and there are no competing blocks. So this is the only one we know which got 66% of the votes. So it is okay if 80% of the validators in restart decide that we should start from here even though it is not confirmed. It is okay to confirm more, but it's not okay to roll back confirmed block. So, in all the choices we have after this, we will see that we try to not have false negatives at all. And false positives might be fine in the design choices. So, the new approach we think because we now want to have machines automatically negotiate what is the block we want to restart that from. So we would still have humans in the room, they would still start restart validators with the argument. Let's say optimists restart, but they don't need to tell you which slot and which hash they need to start from. That's for machines to decide and we would add additional phase, the silent repair phase here is where the validators negotiate with themselves what is a block they should restart from. So, because they are in this repair phase, no one would make new blocks anymore. So there would be no [turbine](https://docs.solana.com/cluster/turbine-block-propagation) traffic at all. The goal here is to just converge as soon as possible.
```

**Jacob Creech:** Yeah, we have 11 minutes for both finishing questions but we can see how far we can get.

**Wen Xu:** Okay, that's fine. I put all the information, all the details in the SIMD and I put more details in this slide. So, you are welcome to read the slide.

#### The Silent Repair Phase

Video |  [16:40](https://youtu.be/GA5AVg_svj8?t=1000)
-|-

**Wen Xu:** So, I am just going to generally introduce the silent repair phase and then we can go proceed to questions. So first of all when you restart a validator with this new arguments. Immediately we send the LastVotedForkSlots which is what you voted last and all the slots on this fork. And after that, everyone aggregates the LastVotedForkSlots from all the other restarted validators. And you could start repairing your slot if you think this slot could potentially have been up, it's confirmed before the restart. And we could draw a line somewhere to say these are the candidates which could have been confirmed before the slot and the other blocks I don't care. So, you repair all the blocks you care and after we repaired all of them, you aggregate all the last votes in the LastVotedForkSlots and choose your HeaviestFork.

> So, I think we are at 20 minutes now. I don't know whether I have introduced the new method enough so everyone has good grabs. But, we could we could see if anyone has any questions at this point. Hello, or I can proceed if no one has questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, I think we are at 20 minutes now. I don't know whether I have introduced the new method enough so everyone has good grasp. But, we could we could see if anyone has any questions at this point. Hello, or I can proceed if no one has questions.
```

**Jacob Creech:** Does anybody have any questions currently on the current approach or should we just continue?

> Alright go ahead and continue then `Wen`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alright go ahead and continue then Wen.
```

#### Exit Silent Repair Phase

Video |  [18:26](https://youtu.be/GA5AVg_svj8?t=1106)
-|-

> **Wen Xu:** Okay! So, to exit a silent repair phase. I think one of the most important thing in outage handling is to make sure everyone is on the same page. Otherwise, you think everyone is on the same page, you single-handedly enter the restart and start making new blocks while everyone still repairing blocks, that would be disastrous. And a lot another I audit might be happening. So here we are very careful when we exit the silent repair phase. We would count whether enough people are ready for action. So the current check is whether 80% of the validators receipt the heaviest fork response from 80 percent of people. So we count 80% here because this is the current line we draw when we do a restart. We wait for 80% to join the restart, then we proceed. And also, even if we see that 80% of people respond, got response from 80%, we also linger for maybe we haven't totally decide the numbers here, we would say linger for two minutes because a gossip message propagation takes time. So linger for two minutes so that my HeaviestFork which contains how many responses I got can reach everyone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Wen Xu:** Okay! So, to exit a silent repair phase. I think one of the most important thing in outage handling is to make sure everyone is on the same page. Otherwise, you think everyone is on the same page, you single-handedly enter the restart and start making new blocks while everyone still repairing blocks, that would be disastrous. And another outage might be happening. So here we are very careful when we exit the silent repair phase. We would count whether enough people are ready for action. So the current check is whether 80% of the validators received the heaviest fork response from 80% of people. So we count 80% here because this is the current line we draw when we do a restart. We wait for 80% to join the restart, then we proceed. And also, even if we see that 80% of people respond, got response from 80%, we also linger for maybe we haven't totally decide the numbers here, we would say linger for two minutes because a gossip message propagation takes time. So linger for two minutes so that my HeaviestFork which contains how many responses I got can reach everyone.
```

> And then, you can perform security checks. Check one is, did everyone agree on the same block, which means same slot and same hash. And whether I also have my local optimistically confirmed block before the restart right. So because my local confirmed block means before the restart, I saw two-thirds of the votes on this block already. So you would imagine this block should be on the selected Fork. So it should be the ancestor or it should be the selected block. If it's not the case then the security check fails because something is wrong, my local confirmed block is getting roll back then you would also exit and hold and wait for human inspection. And if every check succeeds, then perform the current restart logic. We probably will clear the gossip CRDS table so that we don't carry the old restart messages into the new environment. And then, we would automatically start snapshot creation. In contrast to what we are doing today is we manually ask people to manually do it using Ledger. Here we might start earlier once we find out everyone agrees on the same block. Then we execute the same logic, what we are doing now in this new arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And then, you can perform security checks. Check one is, did everyone agree on the same block, which means same slot and same hash. And whether I also have my local optimistically confirmed block before the restart right. So because my local confirmed block means before the restart, I saw two-thirds of the votes on this block already. So you would imagine this block should be on the selected Fork. So it should be the ancestor or it should be the selected block. If it's not the case then the security check fails because something is wrong, my local confirmed block is getting roll back then you would also exit and halt and wait for human inspection. And if every check succeeds, then perform the current restart logic. We probably will clear the gossip CRDS table so that we don't carry the old restart messages into the new environment. And then, we would automatically start snapshot creation. In contrast to what we are doing today is we manually ask people to manually do it using Ledger. Here we might start earlier once we find out everyone agrees on the same block. Then we execute the same logic, what we are doing now in this new arguments.
```

> So, I have a few links. One is a [Google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RkNAyz-5aKvv5FF44b8SoKifChKB705y5SdcEoqMPIc/edit?usp=sharing). I started in this when the proposal was just starting. So it contains many details and a lot of designs we rejected. And why? Because I am currently modifying both the SIMD draft and this Google doc. So this Google doc might be outdated and so some design choices might be different if that's the case SIMD is the newest proposal. And the actual SIMD draft here as well. And this is why I'm asking whether you have any questions again. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, I have a few links. One is a [Google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RkNAyz-5aKvv5FF44b8SoKifChKB705y5SdcEoqMPIc/edit?usp=sharing) I started when the proposal was just starting. So it contains many details and a lot of designs we rejected and why. Because I am currently modifying both the SIMD draft and this Google doc. So this Google doc might be outdated and so some design choices might be different if that's the case SIMD is the newest proposal. And the actual SIMD draft here as well. And this is why I'm asking whether you have any questions again. 
```

> So, I haven't described the details of the algorithm. I have backup slide at the end to talk about. There are basically two algorithms, one is `how we calculate which blocks I should repair when I have all the LastVotedForkSlots`. And the other is `how do I select a block in the HeaviestFork`. So these two algorithms are in the SIMD and I also have some description here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, I haven't described the details of the algorithm. I have backup slide at the end to talk about. There are basically two algorithms, one is how we calculate which blocks I should repair when I have all the LastVotedForkSlots. And the other is how do I select a block in the HeaviestFork. So these two algorithms are in the SIMD and I also have some description here.
```

**Wen Xu:** Sorry I haven't checked that document in detail. So I think, correct me if I am wrong, your proposal is to expose the last restarted slot somehow through Ledger right?

**Mango Team:** Yeah, exactly.

**Wen Xu:** Yeah so, here I think it is orthogonal but once the silent repair phase is over and we know where we are restarting from. We could also like connect to your code and expose this information somewhere right?

**Mango Team:** Oh yeah exactly, so like silent repair should be considered as a restart right? Because it may take time to restart the slot silently right? That's my question.

**Wen Xu:** So when it is in the silent repair phase, we don't know for sure it's a restart. They are negotiating but they don't know whether they can decide on the same block. So in that case I don't think we will expose anything. And once that phase is over and we know we are really entering the restart, then we can expose that restart slot. Did that answer the question?

**Mango Team:** Okay! yeah, it makes sense yeah.

> **Anonymous:** There shouldn't actually be any changes to that proposal because once we've committed to restarting at the coordinated restart slot there is going to be a hard Fork anyway and we will. So that will update this as far.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Anonymous:** There shouldn't actually be any changes to that proposal because once we've committed to restarting at the coordinated restart slot there is going to be a hard fork anyway and we will. So that will update the Sysvar.
```

**Mango Team:** Okay, okay that's cool.

**Wen Xu:** Yeah. So, that works nicely together. And any other questions?

**Jacob Creech:** Any have a question?

> **Validator Operator** Okay sure so as a validator operator, I want to say it is very encouraging to see how much really good thought design seems to have gone into what you are proposing here. I predict that what would happen during another restart event is that there would still be humans that will get alerting and there will be a lot of confusion and talk. So, if we are kind of raising some automated process, just keep in mind that you may want controls there as certainly messaging from the validator to sort of let us be very aware of what's going on so that we can make decisions about. Because if someone believes that there's a bug or a reason that the restart shouldn't proceed allowing something to run away with a whole cluster restart that we want to pause. Just having controls and informational messages to help us understand what's happening are very important. I just want to emphasize that. That's all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Validator Operator** Okay sure so as a validator operator, I want to say it is very encouraging to see how much really good thought design seems to have gone into what you are proposing here. I predict that what would happen during another restart event is that there would still be humans that will get alerting and there will be a lot of confusion and talk. So, if we are kind of racing some automated process, just keep in mind that you may want controls there and certainly messaging from the validator to sort of let us be very aware of what's going on so that we can make decisions about. Because if someone believes that there's a bug or a reason that the restart shouldn't proceed allowing something to run away with a whole cluster restart that we want to pause. Just having controls and informational messages to help us understand what's happening are very important. I just want to emphasize that. That's all.
```

**Wen Xu:** Yes yes, I think maybe later there will be I would try to get more feedback from the Operators because this really impacts how you operate during outage right? So, it helps to get more feedback there. So I think first of all I totally agree and the current approach is opt-in if you don't restart your validator with that flag nothing would happen. We would keep the current approach if you feel more comfortable with that and also of course the outage handling is mostly to assist people, it's not to replace people. And we will also of course give you ways to inspect what's happening inside and ways to like decide no this automatic restart is not working. I should do something else, that's totally doable. It will be all be command line controlled. Does that answer a question?

**Validator Operator** Yes, it did. Thank you.

> **Jacob Creech:** Thank you everyone. Thank you `Wen` for presenting today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Jacob Creech:** Thank you everyone. Thank you Wen for presenting today.
```
